---
layout: post
title: "Group-restricted perfect matchings on a bipartite graph (CF-468D)"
tags: editorial
---

### Problem [CF-468D](https://codeforces.com/problemset/problem/468/D)

### Statement

> Given an undirected weighted tree on $n$ nodes, find a permutation $p$ which maximises $\sum_{1 \leq u \leq n}{\text{dis}(u, p_u)}$. If there are multiple such permutations, find the lexicographically smallest one.

### Solution

#### Observation 1:

In the optimal permutation, paths $(u, p_u)$ and $(v, p_v)$ intersect for every pair of nodes $(u, v)$.

<details><summary>Proof</summary>
Assume that the two paths do not intersect for some optimal $p$. If we swap $p_u$ and $p_v$, the two paths now intersect and the score strictly increases. So $p$ wasn't optimal.
</details>

#### Observation 2:

In the optimal permutation, there exists a node $c$ such that all paths $(u, p_u)$ cover $c$.

<details><summary>Proof</summary>
<ul>
<li>We know that every pair of paths must intersect. </li>
<li> Let us root the tree at node $1$. 
Now, there can be atmost one child $v$ such that there exists some path in the subtree of $v$ which doesn't come out of the subtree (touch 1) (Since if there are multiple such child nodes, the paths completely contained in their subtrees wouldn't intersect). </li>
<li>
If there is no such child node, then $1$ is the node $c$.
Otherwise, if there is such a child node $v$, we travel down to it and repeat the same process.
Since this traversal definitely ends at some point of time (it will eventually travel down to a leaf where there will trivially be no such child $v$), we will always find such a $c$ for an optimal permutation $p$. </li>
</ul>
</details>

Now, if we fix such a node $c$, the score of the optimal array will simply be $2 \cdot \sum_{1 \leq u \leq n} {\text{dis(c, u)}}$. It should be pretty easy to see why this is the case. 

Since $\sum_{1 \leq u \leq n} {\text{dis(c, u)}}$ is maximised when $c$ is the centroid of the array, all paths $(u, p_u)$ will touch the centroid of the tree.

Let us root the tree at the centroid $c$. Now, all that remains is to find a lexicographically minimal permutation $p$ such that $\text{lca}(u, p_u) = c \; \forall \; u \leq n$.

We define $\text{rep}(u)$ to be the first node on the path from $c$ to $u$. So for every $u$, a restriction on $p_u$ is that $\text{rep}(u) \neq \text{rep} (p_u)$. Let us not worry about lexicographic minimization for now, let's just look at finding some valid permutation.

### Generalization

This problem can now be generalized to the following:

> You are given a complete bipartite graph $G(V, E)$ (defined on *equally* sized partitions $A$ and $B$), and some groups of nodes $S_1, S_2, \dots S_x$ such that $S_i \subseteq A \cup B$, $S_i \cap S_j = \emptyset \; \forall \; i \neq j$ and $S_1 \cup S_2 \dots \cup S_x = V$. Find a perfect matching on $G$ such that there is no edge between two nodes which belongs to the same group of nodes $S_i$.

How do we solve this problem? Let's think about when the problem is solvable first.

We observe that a **necessary** condition for being able to find a perfect matching in this graph is the following:
For every group $S_i$, we must have $\vert S_i \cap A \vert \leq n - \vert S_i \cap B \vert             \implies \vert S_i \cap A \vert +  \vert S_i \cap B \vert \leq n               \implies \vert S_i \vert \leq n$ (where $n = \vert A \vert = \vert B \vert$).

<details><summary>Proof</summary>
Assume that $\vert S_i \cap A \vert > n - \vert S_i \cap B \vert$, this would mean that it wouldn't be possible to assign a valid node from $B$ to every node in $\vert S_i \cap A \vert$. Therefore, a perfect matching wouldn't exist. 
</details>

Now as it turns out, this condition ($\vert S_i \vert \leq n$) is also **sufficient** for the existence of a perfect matching.

<details><summary>Proof</summary>
Let's assume that the condition is initially satisfied. Now, can see that we can always remove a pair of nodes $(a, b), a \in A, b \in B$ from $A$ and $B$, and add an edge from between them, such that the condition is satisfied for $n = \vert A \vert - 1$ too (it holds as an invariant after every move).

How to remove such an edge? We only have to ensure that any $S_i$ with $S_i = n$ has a vertice removed from it. There can be at most two such groups.

Cases:
<ol>
<li> Two such groups: remove one vertex from both of them (such that one belongs to $A$ and one belongs to $B$). It's always possible to remove such a pair. </li>
<li> One such groups: remove one vertex from this group and one from any other group. </li>
<li> No such group: remove a pair of vertices from two different groups </li>
</ol>

It's easy to see that once this process terminates, we will have a perfect matching.
</details>

### Back to our problem

In our problem, we have the set of permutation indices as $A$, the set of permutation values as $B$, and the groups of nodes are formed by partitioning nodes on the basis of $\text{rep}(u)$.

Now that we know a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a perfect matching given some group restrictions, we can easily find a lexicographically minimum permutation in the following way:

```
Iterate over indice i from 1 to n:
    Find the smallest value v such that rep[i] != rep[v] and the invariant holds if we remove the pair (i, v)  
```

Finding the smallest such $v$ can be easily accomplished by using a set and doing some casework. I will not discuss it here because its trivial. There is an irksome edge case wherein we are allowed to have $c = p_c$, so take care of that.

Submission: https://codeforces.com/contest/468/submission/277773412