---
displayMode: blog
title: CF-2210
date: 2026-03-29
tags: [contest]
---

## Thoughts

I have begun training for WF, and want my practice to take a more structured form. Hence this recapitulation, and any others that may follow.

## Solutions


### A

Reversing the identity sequence clearly works.

### B

Let's say that the optimal sequence of operations results in us stopping at position $i$.

Then it's optimal to have sat at all chairs $j$ behind us such that either $p_j \leq j$ or $i \leq p_j$. The first category doesn't prevent us from going forward at all (as they mark chairs behind or at our current position), and the second category won't prevent us from reaching $i$.

The optimal score for every stopping point can therefore be computed by iterating over $i$ in increasing order, and using either a `std::set` or a range query DS.

### C1

Notice that the condition:

> $\operatorname{gcd}(a_l,a_{l+1},\ldots,{a_r})=\operatorname{gcd}(a'_l,a'_{l+1},\ldots,a'_r)$ for all $1 \leq l < r \leq n$

is equivalent to 

> $\operatorname{gcd}(a_i, a_{i + 1}) = \operatorname{gcd}(a'_i, a'_{i + 1})$ for all $1 \leq i < n$

Now, for a particular $1 < i < n$, its value in the second array, $a'_i$ only matters to two conditions:

1. $\operatorname{gcd}(a_i, a_{i - 1}) = \operatorname{gcd}(a'_i, a'_{i - 1})$
2. $\operatorname{gcd}(a_i, a_{i + 1}) = \operatorname{gcd}(a'_i, a'_{i + 1})$

We notice that $a'_i$ must therefore be divisible by $c_i = \operatorname{lcm}(\operatorname{gcd}(a_i, a_{i - 1}), \operatorname{gcd}(a_i, a_{i + 1}))$.

$c_i$ is also the smallest value for $a'_i$ that satisfies both these conditions (at least from $i$'s side). 

If $c_i < a_i = b_i$, we simply set $a'_i = c_i$, and this increases our score by 1.

Otherwise, we have $c_i = a_i$. In this case:

1. We cannot set $a'_i$ to anything less than $c_i$, as we have shown $c_i$ to be the smallest valid value of $c_i$.
2. We cannot set $a'_i$ to any other multiple of $c_i$ as $c_i = a_i = b_i$.

Therefore, we are forced to set $a'_i = a_i$ (not make a move).


### C2

The harder version decouples $a_i$ and $b_i$.

This only affects our previous analysis at one place: previously, when we had $c_i = a_i$, in point 2, we argued that we cannot set $a'_i$ to some non-trivial multiple of $c_i$, as we had $c_i = a_i = b_i$. 

But now, we can have $a_i < b_i$, which will allow us to set $a'_i = m_i \cdot c_i$ (where $m_i > 1$).

##### Lemma 1:
> There exists an optimal solution wherein the chosen $m_i$ for all $i$ at which we set $a'_i = m_i \cdot c_i$ ($m_i > 1$) is prime.

Proof: easy enough to show, but left as an exercise to the reader.

##### Lemma 2:

> There exists an optimal solution wherein the set of used $m_i$ is a subset of the first $P = 25$ primes.

Proof: left as an exercise to the reader (hint: $m_i$ is only restricted by $m_{i - 1}, a_{i - 1}, c_i, m_{i + 1}, a_{i + 1}$, and any number up to $10^{18}$ cannot have too many distinct prime factors).

We can therefore do a dynamic programming with the following state:

- $f(i)$ = maximum number of moves we can make in the prefix $i$, if we make no move at position $i$.
- $g(i, x)$ = maximum number of moves we can make in the prefix $i$, if we set $a'_i = c_i \cdot p_x$ (where $p_x$ is the $x$-th smallest prime).

Computing all of these states takes $O(n \cdot P ^ 2 \cdot \log{10^9})$ time, which is fast enough.

### D

Firstly, let $f(s)$ be the maximum $x \leq n/2$ such that for all $i \leq x$, $s_i$ gets matched to $s_{n - i + 1}$ by RBS rules.

##### Lemma 1:

> $f(s) = f(t)$ is a necessary requirement for $s$ and $t$ to be interconvertible, as $f(s) = f(s')$ after any operation that converts $s$ to $s'$

Proof: Exercise for the reader (hint: this outer section can never be modified by any operation).

If $f(s) \neq f(t)$, we're done. Otherwise, we get rid of the first and last $f(s)$ characters from both $s$ and $t$.

Now, consider the RBS trees $T(s)$ and $T(t)$ built from $s$ and $t$ (note that since we removed the first/last $f(s)$ characters, these trees will either be empty, or the root will have > 1 child).

The equivalent problem on these trees is the following:

> You can perform any number of the following operations on either tree:
> 
> Select nodes $u$ and $v$ such that neither is an ancestor of the either, and attach some "adjacent" children of $v$ (in the ordered child sequence) to the parent of $u$, and attach $v$ to $u$.
>
> Can the two trees be made isomorphic?


Now, notice the following invariant: The number of leaf nodes remains the same after every operation.

While obviously necessary, it turns out that having an equal number of leaf nodes is sufficient for two trees to be interconvertible.

Proof:

Let's say a tree has $l$ leaves.

Regardless of the initial structure of the tree, we can always convert it to the following equivalence class representative:

A tree with $l - 1$ leaves hanging from the root, and a chain containing the remaining nodes.