---
layout: post
title: Easy Problem  (Taiwan 1997)
tags: math
---

Well, I wanted an excuse to start writing blogs explaining solutions to some MO problems and a friend sent me a problem today so here we are. It isn't really interesting but I have nothing better to do.

## Statement

> **Problem 1.3.15.** Determine all integers $k$ for which there exists a function $f : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{Z}$ such that:
>
> - $f(1997) = 1998$;
> - for all $a, b \in \mathbb{N}$, $f(ab) = f(a) + f(b) + kf(\text{gcd}(a, b))$.
> 
> (1997 Taiwanese Mathematical Olympiad)


## Solution

We have a functional equation of the following form:

$$f(ab) = f(a) + f(b) + kf (\text{gcd}(a, b))$$

Let's consider $f(1)$, as it would greatly simplify basic equations of the form $f(x) = f(1) + f(x) + k f(1)$, which would likely help us:

$$f(1) = f(1 \cdot 1)$$

$$ = f(1) + f(1) + k f(1)$$

$$ = (2 + k) f(1)$$

$$ \implies k = -1 \;\; \text{or} \;\; f(1) = 0 \tag{1}$$

$$\therefore k \neq -1 \implies f(1) = 0$$

Let us firstly consider the case $k \neq -1$ as $f(1) = 0$ should serve to simplify equations.

We notice that this relation seems to strongly constrain the values that $f(x)$ can take by relating it with all of $f(a), f(b), f(\text{gcd(a, b)})$ and $k$. It feels like there wouldn't be very many values that $k$ can reasonably take.

To narrow down the set of potential candidates, we try and find equations of $k$ that must hold.

Let us consider powers of a prime $p$.

$$f(p) = f(p) + f(1) + k f(1) = f(p)$$

$$f(p^2) = f(p) + f(p) + k f(p) = (2 + k) f(p)$$

$$f(p^3) = f(p) + f(p^2) + k f(p) = (3 + 2k) f(p)$$

$$ \dots$$

$$f(p^i) = (i + (i - 1) k) f(p) \; \; \forall \; \; (i > 1) \tag{2}$$

However, an alternate expansion for $f(p^4)$ is:

$$f(p^4) = f(p^2) + f(p^2) + k f(p^2) = (4 + 2k) f(p) + k (2 + k) f(p) $$

$$\implies (4 + 3k) f(p) = (4 + 2k) f(p) + (2k + k^2) f(p)$$

$$\implies k^2 + k = 0$$

$$\implies k = -1 \;\; \text{or} \;\; k = 0 \tag{3}$$

Recall that we already have reason to believe $k = -1$ might be a valid value.

Anyways, let us now test both of these values for validity separately.

### k = 0

The functional equation now reduces to:

$$f(ab) = f(a) + f(b) \tag{4}$$

Since $k \neq  -1$, we now have $f(1) = 0$.


From $\text{(2)}$, for prime $p$ we have:

$$f(p^i) = i \cdot f(p) \tag{5}$$

#### Claim:
> f(p) can be assigned arbitrary values for all prime $p$ without violating $\text{(4)}$.

#### Proof:

Let $x = \prod_{p \mid x} p^{v_p(x)} $ where $p \in \mathbb{P}$ and $v_p(x)$ is the p-adic order of $x$.

We can observe that by recursively expanding $f(x)$ to separate primes with different values, we can obtain:

$$f(x) = \sum_{p \mid x} {(f(p ^ {v_p(x)}))} = \sum_{p \mid x} {(v_p(x) \cdot f(p))} \tag{6}$$

We now wish to prove that for any expansion of $f(x)$ into $f(x) = f(a) + f(b)$, we have $f(a) + f(b) = \sum_{p \mid x} {(v_p(x) \cdot f(p))}$.

This is easy to do using strong induction.

We assume that this property holds for all $y < x$ and show that it holds for $x$.

Consider any expansion of $f(x) = f(a \cdot b)$

$$f(x) = f(a) + f(b)$$

$$ = \sum_{p \mid x} { v_p(a)f(p)} + \sum_{p \mid x} {v_p(b)f(p)} $$

$$ = \sum_{p \mid x} { (v_p(a) + v_p(b))f(p)} $$

Now, it's easy to see that $v_p(a) + v_p(b) = v_p(ab) =v_p(x)$.

$$\implies f(x) =  \sum_{p \mid x} {v_p(x) f(p)}$$

Hence proved.

We observe that there is no dependency on the values of $f(p)$ and the $\text{(4)}$ holds independently of $f(p)$ for all prime $p$.

Since $1997$ is prime, we can freely assign $f(1997) = 1998$.

$\therefore$ $k = 0$ is valid.

### k = -1

The functional equation now reduces to:

$$f(ab) = f(a) + f(b) - f(\text{gcd}(a, b))\tag{7}$$

Using $\text{(2)}$, we also obtain for prime $p$:

$$f(p^i) = f(p) \; \; \forall \; \; i \tag{8}$$

#### Claim:
> f(p) can be assigned arbitrary values for all prime $p$ without violating $\text{(7)}$.

#### Proof:

Here, we use the same high level idea that we used for the case $k= 0$, ie. to show that $k = -1$ is a valid choice:

- We will find a simple expansion for $f(x)$ and show that any expansion would result in the same value as the simple expansion.

The simple expansion will be the same, we recursively "separate primes" to obtain:

$$f(x) = \sum_{p \mid x} {f(p ^ {v_p(x)})} = \sum_{p \vert x} {f(p)}$$

Now, we wish to show that for any expansion $f(x) = f(a \cdot b)$, we have $f(a \cdot b) = \sum_{p \vert x} {f(p)}$.

It's trivial to do using strong induction.

We assume that this property holds for all $y < x$ and show that it holds for $x$.

Consider any expansion of $f(x) = f(a \cdot b)$

$$ f(x) = f(a) + f(b) - f(\text{gcd}(a, b))$$

$$= \sum_{p \mid x, v_p(a) > 0} {f(p)} + \sum_{p \mid x, v_p(b) > 0} {f(p)} - \sum_{p\mid x, v_p(a) > 0, v_p(b) > 0} {f(p)} $$

$$ = \sum_{p \mid x, v_p(a) > 0, v_p(b) > 0} {(f(p) + f(p) - f(p))} + \sum_{p \mid x, v_p(a) > 0, v_p(b) = 0} {f(p)} + \sum_{p \mid x, v_p(b) > 0, v_p(a) = 0} {f(p)}$$

$$\implies f(x) = \sum_{p \mid x} { f(p)} $$

Hence proved.

We observe that there is no dependency on the values of $f(p)$ and that $\text{(7)}$ holds independently of $f(p)$ for all prime $p$.

$\therefore$ $k = 0$ is also valid.

### Answer

$k = 0$ and $k = -1$ are the only valid solutions.



### Afterthoughts

An equally simple but more interesting (although it still requires strong induction :clown:) proof for $k = -1$ would be the following:

Let us model the process of repeated recursive expansion of $f(x)$ into expansions on a tree (ie. draw a bijective relationship between these two processes).

The setup for the tree expansion is as follows:
-  Initially, we only have a root node in this tree, labelled $x$. 
- We also have a value $y = 0$.
- We can only perform expansions on nodes which have no children.
- To perform an expansion on a node labelled $x$, we choose $a, b$ such that $x = a \cdot b$, attach two child nodes $a$ and $b$ to $x$, and add $- f(\text{gcd(a, b)})$ to $y$.
- When we choose to end the process, we add $f(l)$ for all leaves to $y$.

#### Claim

$f(x) = y$

#### Proof

Let us show that every prime $p$ has a contribution of exactly $f(p)$ to $y$.

Consider every prime $p$ separately. 

How does it affect $y$?

At every internal node $u$ in the tree with children $c_1$ and $c_2$, we would have added $-f(p)$ to $y$, since here we would have $p \mid \text{gcd}(c_1, c_2)$. 

At every leaf $l$ in the tree such that $p \mid l$, we will add $f(p)$ to the tree.

Now, we can notice that every internal node $u$ which has $p \mid \text{gcd}(c_1, c_2)$ would be present in the virtual tree created from the set of leaves $l$ such that $p \mid l$.

> In any binary tree, the number of internal nodes in a virtual tree constructed from a set of leaves is equal to one less than the number of leaves.

Therefore if there are $m$ internal nodes $u$, we will have $m + 1$ leaves $l$.

So the total contribution of $p$ to $y$ would be $(m + 1) f(p) - m \cdot f(p) = f(p)$.

Hence proved.